docs: Add release notes for Metals 1.3.3 (#6578)
scalameta/metals: website/blog/2024-07-10-thallium.md

---
author: Tomasz Godzik
title: Metals v1.3.3 - Thallium
authorURL: https://twitter.com/<login>
authorImageURL: https://github.com/<login>.png
---

> We're happy to announce the release of Metals v1.3.3, which is in a number of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're happy to announce the release of Metals v1.3.3, which brings a number of
```

    <td>New features</td>
    <td align="center">3</td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

For full details:
[https://github.com/scalameta/metals/milestone/69?closed=1](https://github.com/scalameta/metals/milestone/69?closed=1)

Metals is a language server for Scala that works with VS Code, Vim, Emacs, Zed,
Helix and Sublime Text. Metals is developed at the
[Scala Center](https://scala.epfl.ch/) and [VirtusLab](https://virtuslab.com)
with the help from contributors from the community.

## TL;DR

Check out [https://scalameta.org/metals/](https://scalameta.org/metals/), and
give Metals a try!

- [Index implementations in JDK sources](#index-implementations-in-jdk-sources)
- [Value completions for union types](#value-completions-for-union-types)
- [Allow debugging for all build servers](#allow-debugging-for-all-build-servers)

## Index implementations in JDK sources

Since Metals v1.3.0 it's possible to search for implementations of classes or
classes' members inside the dependency sources. However, this wasn't enabled for
JDK sources as it added a substantial amount of indexing time even in smaller
projects.

In this version of Metals we added a central database that can be found under

> the .metals directory in user home, which contains shared indexes of JDK sources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `.metals` directory in user home, which contains shared indexes of JDK sources
```

thus avoiding a need to index them more than once on any given machine.

![jdk-sources](https://i.imgur.com/lTMmhD8.gif)

This great improvement was added by [kasiaMarek](https://github.com/kasiaMarek)

## Value completions for union types

> Union types are a new feature in Scala 3 that allows types to be combined when

Author: Would you mind sharing an example, I don't see to figure out one :sweat_smile:

> Union types are a new feature in Scala 3 that allows types to be combined when

Reviewer: Just combinations of unions and intersections:
```Scala
type Color = "red" | "back" | "blue"
type Ford = Color & "black"
```

> Union types are a new feature in Scala 3 that allows types to be combined when

Author: Ach, makes sense!

> Union types are a new feature in Scala 3 that allows types to be combined when

Author: I added another sentence about it

we need to specify that certain value can be of more than one type.

For example we can have:

```scala
val a: Int | String = "Hello!"
val b: Int | String = 123
```

In this version of Metals [kasiaMarek](https://github.com/kasiaMarek) added
support for value completions where union types are unions of specific literal
types.

![example](https://i.imgur.com/FKrytqC.png)

## Allow debugging for all build servers

For a long while it was possible to debug your code only when using Metals with

> Bloop or sbt BSP server. This was caused by the fact that debugging was

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bloop or sbt server. This was caused by the fact that debugging was
```

implemented in a separate library and would require additional data from the
build tools.

In this version we were able to work around that and bring debugging
capabilities to Metals in case a server doesn't provide debugging by itself.
Unfortunately, in those cases hot code reload will not be available.

This should work both for main classes and tests.

Since this is quite a new feature please do let us know about any issues.

> This is another great feature brought by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is another great feature was brought by
```
